This video we'll learn what constants are in C++.
Constants are very much like C++ variables.
They have names.
The rules for naming is the same.
They occupy storage and they're usually typed.
This means that when you declare a constant you usually declare their type just like you do with a variable.
There is one type of constant that is not typed and I'll talk about that at the end of the video.
The big difference between variables and constants is that unlike variables the value of C++ constants
cannot change once they're declared.
For example if I declare age to be a constant integer and assign 21 to it then the value of age will
always remain 21 and I won't be able to change it if I try to change it.
I'll get a compiler error.
Why would you need constants in a program.
Let's consider a simple application that uses the number of months in a year throughout the code.
We could certainly use the number 12 everywhere we need it.
However 12 could be a lot of things.
And if the program is of significant size it might not be clear to other programmers that 12 means the
number of months in a year.
So we could create a variable and call it months in the year and assign 12 to it and now use that name
in our code whenever we need to use 12 in that context.
That's a much better solution than hard coding 12.
But that's a variable.
Which means it can be changed even accidentally.
A better solution is to declare months in a year to be a constant integer and to assign 12 to it.
Now we can use a meaningful name in our code.
That means 12 and we can't change it either by accident.
C++ gives us several ways to create constants.
We can use literals declared constants constants expressions enumerated constants and finally we can
use define constants.
We'll learn about constant expressions and enumerated constants later in this course.
Let's see what literal constants are first.
Literals are the most obvious kind of constants.
We can use little ones to run our code and we often do.
They're used to express specific values.
We've already seen examples of literals in this slide.
You can see that 12 one point five six Frank and the character J are examples of literal constants.
For example the floating point literal constant one point five six always expresses the value 1.5 six
literal constants also have types based on a naming convention.
You can be explicit with the types of little Hans for example for integer literal constants you can
add certain suffixes to the integer literal to specify a different type.
For example the letters you and L specify unsigned and long respectively.
This can be either lowercase or uppercase.
This slide shows just a few of the combinations for floating point numbers.
You can use the L and F suffixes as shown in this slide.
We can also have character literal constants in C++.
We haven't used these yet but they're commonly used within string literals.
They consist of the backslash character followed by another character and they're called Escape codes.
You can see some examples in this slide the see out statement will display hello.
Then tab over and display there then it will go to the beginning of the next line and display my friend
and that it will go to the beginning of the next line again.
It's very common to see Escape codes embedded in string literals in output statements.
By far the most common way of declaring constants in C++ is to use declared constants using the Consta
keyword.
The syntax is exactly like that of a variable declaration with the Konski word at the beginning.
You must initialize the declared constant or the compiler will give you an uninitialized Konst error
message.
What happens if you try to change the value of a constant.
You guessed it you can't.
The compiler will give you an error letting you know that the concept is read only and you can't change
the last way of declaring constants and C++ by using the preprocessor directive poun define.
Let's take a look at that defined constants were very commonly use an older C and C++ code.
These constants are defined using the power defined preprocessor directive.
I'm showing you define constants because you may run into them since there is so much C++ legacy code
out there.
Here you're telling the preprocessor that wherever it sees the word pie replace it with three point
1 4 1 5 9 to 6.
Think of this as a blind Find Replace as you might do in a word processor.
The preprocessor will gladly substitute one for the other since the preprocessor doesn't know C++ it
can't type check.
And this could lead to difficult to find errors.
So please don't use defined constants in modern C++ code in the next video.
We'll head over to the code ID and see how we can declare and use constants in C++.
First will write a program using literal constants then will refactor the code to use declared constants.